
WikiReader v1.1 Software (C) 2010 Openmoko, Inc.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DO NOT EDIT THE CONTENTS OF THIS SD CARD. 
This entire file system is automatically generated.
Directly editing any of these files may cause your
WikiReader to stop working. 

WikiReader uses Free and Open Source Software (FOSS).
For more information, please read the contents of
the 'License' folder.

For support, please email support@thewikireader.com.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

WIKIPEDIA DISCLAIMER

    Contents
    1. General Disclaimer
    2. Risk Disclaimer
    3. Medical Disclaimer
    4. Legal Disclaimer
    5. Content Disclaimer
    

1. GENERAL DISCLAIMER

1.1 WIKIPEDIA MAKES NO GUARANTEE OF VALIDITY
Wikipedia is an online open-content collaborative encyclopedia, that is, a
voluntary association of individuals and groups working to develop a common
resource of human knowledge. The structure of the project allows anyone with an
Internet connection to alter its content. Please be advised that nothing found
here has necessarily been reviewed by people with the expertise required to
provide you with complete, accurate or reliable information. That is not to say
that you will not find valuable and accurate information in Wikipedia; much of
the time you will. However, Wikipedia cannot guarantee the validity of the
information found here. The content of any given article may recently have been
changed, vandalized or altered by someone whose opinion does not correspond with
the state of knowledge in the relevant fields. Note that most other
encyclopedias and reference works also have similar disclaimers.

1.2 NO FORMAL PEER REVIEW
We are working on ways to select and highlight reliable versions of articles.
Our active community of editors uses tools such as the Special:Recentchanges and
Special:Newpages feeds to monitor new and changing content. However, Wikipedia
is not uniformly peer reviewed; while readers may correct errors or engage in
casual peer review, they have no legal duty to do so and thus all information
read here is without any implied warranty of fitness for any purpose or use
whatsoever. Even articles that have been vetted by informal peer review or
featured article processes may later have been edited inappropriately, just
before you view them. None of the contributors, sponsors, administrators, or
anyone else connected with Wikipedia in any way whatsoever can be responsible
for the appearance of any inaccurate or libelous information or for your use of
the information contained in or linked from these web pages.

1.3 NO CONTRACT; LIMITED LICENSE
Please make sure that you understand that the information provided here is being
provided freely, and that no kind of agreement or contract is created between
you and the owners or users of this site, the owners of the servers upon which
it is housed, the individual Wikipedia contributors, any project administrators,
sysops or anyone else who is in any way connected with this project or sister
projects subject to your claims against them directly. You are being granted a
limited license to copy anything from this site; it does not create or imply any
contractual or extracontractual liability on the part of Wikipedia or any of its
agents, members, organizers or other users. There is no agreement or
understanding between you and Wikipedia regarding your use or modification of
this information beyond the Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 3.0 Unported
License (CC-BY-SA) and the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL); neither is
anyone at Wikipedia responsible should someone change, edit, modify or remove
any information that you may post on Wikipedia or any of its associated
projects.

1.4 TRADEMARKS
Any of the trademarks, service marks, collective marks, design rights or similar
rights that are mentioned, used or cited in the articles of the Wikipedia
encyclopedia are the property of their respective owners. Their use here does
not imply that you may use them for any other purpose other than for the same or
a similar informational use as contemplated by the original authors of these
Wikipedia articles under the CC-BY-SA and GFDL licensing schemes. Unless
otherwise stated Wikipedia and Wikimedia sites are neither endorsed by nor
affiliated with any of the holders of any such rights and as such Wikipedia
cannot grant any rights to use any otherwise protected materials. Your use of
any such or similar incorporeal property is at your own risk.

1.5 PERSONALITY RIGHTS
Wikipedia contains material which may portray an identifiable person who is
alive or deceased recently. The use of images of living or recently deceased
individuals is, in some jurisdictions, restricted by laws pertaining to
personality rights, independent from their copyright status. Before using these
types of content, please ensure that you have the right to use it under the laws
which apply in the circumstances of your intended use. You are solely
responsible for ensuring that you do not infringe someone else's personality
rights.

1.6 JURISDICTION AND LEGALITY OF CONTENT
Publication of information found in Wikipedia may be in violation of the laws of
the country or jurisdiction from where you are viewing this information. The
Wikipedia database is stored on a server in the State of Florida in the United
States of America, and is maintained in reference to the protections afforded
under local and federal law. Laws in your country or jurisdiction may not
protect or allow the same kinds of speech or distribution. Wikipedia does not
encourage the violation of any laws; and cannot be responsible for any
violations of such laws, should you link to this domain or use, reproduce, or
republish the information contained herein.

1.7 NOT PROFESSIONAL ADVICE
If you need specific advice (for example, medical, legal, financial, or risk
management) please seek a professional who is licensed or knowledgeable in that
area.


2 RISK DISCLAIMER

2.1 USE WIKIPEDIA AT YOUR OWN RISK

PLEASE BE AWARE THAT ANY INFORMATION YOU MAY FIND IN WIKIPEDIA MAY BE
INACCURATE, MISLEADING, DANGEROUS, ADDICTIVE, UNETHICAL OR ILLEGAL. Some
information on Wikipedia may create an unreasonable risk for readers who choose
to apply or use the information in their own activities or to promote the
information for use by third parties.

None of the authors, contributors, sponsors, administrators, vandals, or anyone
else connected with Wikipedia, in any way whatsoever, can be responsible for
your use of the information contained in or linked from these web pages.

Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that information you receive from
Wikipedia is correct and has been verified. Check the references at the end of
the article. Read the article's talk page and revision history to see if there
are outstanding disputes over the contents of the article. Double-check all
information with independent sources.

If an article contains suggestions regarding dangerous, illegal or unethical
activities, remember that anyone can post this information on Wikipedia. The
authors may not be qualified to provide you with complete information or to
inform you about adequate safety precautions and other measures to prevent
injury, or other damage to your person, property or reputation. If you need
specific advice (for example, medical, legal, financial, marital or risk
management) please seek a professional licensed or knowledgeable in that area.
Wikipedia is not uniformly peer reviewed; while readers may correct errors or
remove erroneous suggestions, they have no legal duty to do so. All information
found on the site is without any implied warranty of fitness for any purpose or
use whatsoever.

No consequential damages can be sought against Wikipedia, as it is a voluntary
association of individuals formed to create freely licensed online educational,
cultural and informational resources. This information is being given to you
gratuitously and there is no agreement or understanding between you and
Wikipedia regarding your use or modification of this information beyond the
Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 3.0 Unported License (CC-BY-SA) and the
GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL)

3 MEDICAL DISCLAIMER

3.1 WIKIPEDIA DOES NOT GIVE MEDICAL ADVICE
Wikipedia contains articles on many medical topics; however, no warranty
whatsoever is made that any of the articles are accurate. There is absolutely no
assurance that any statement contained or cited in an article touching on
medical matters is true, correct, precise, or up-to-date. The overwhelming
majority of such articles are written, in part or in whole, by nonprofessionals.
Even if a statement made about medicine is accurate, it may not apply to you or
your symptoms.

The medical information provided on Wikipedia is, at best, of a general nature
and cannot substitute for the advice of a medical professional (for instance, a
qualified doctor/physician, nurse, pharmacist/chemist, and so on). Wikipedia is
not a doctor.

None of the individual contributors, system operators, developers, sponsors of
Wikipedia nor anyone else connected to Wikipedia can take any responsibility for
the results or consequences of any attempt to use or adopt any of the
information presented on this web site.

Nothing on Wikipedia.org or included as part of any project of Wikimedia
Foundation Inc., should be construed as an attempt to offer or render a medical
opinion or otherwise engage in the practice of medicine.


4. LEGAL DISCLAIMER

4.1 WIKIPEDIA DOES NOT GIVE LEGAL OPINIONS
Wikipedia contains articles on many legal topics; however, no warranty
whatsoever is made that any of the articles are accurate. There is absolutely no
assurance that any statement contained in an article touching on legal matters
is true, correct or precise. Law varies from place to place and it evolves over
timeâ€”sometimes quite quickly. Even if a statement made about the law is
accurate, it may only be accurate in the jurisdiction of the person posting the
information; as well, the law may have changed, been modified or overturned by
subsequent development since the entry was made on Wikipedia.

The legal information provided on Wikipedia is, at best, of a general nature and
cannot substitute for the advice of a licensed professional, i.e., by a
competent authority with specialised knowledge who can apply it to the
particular circumstances of your case. Please contact a local bar association,
law society or similar association of jurists in your legal jurisdiction to
obtain a referral to a competent legal professional if you do not have other
means of contacting an attorney-at-law, lawyer, civil law notary, barrister or
solicitor.

Neither the individual contributors, system operators, developers, nor sponsors
of Wikipedia nor anyone else connected to Wikipedia can take any responsibility
for the results or consequences of any attempt to use or adopt any of the
information or disinformation presented on this web site.

Nothing on Wikipedia.org or of any project of Wikimedia Foundation Inc., should
be construed as an attempt to offer or render a legal opinion or otherwise
engage in the practice of law.

5 CONTENT DISCLAIMER

5.1 WIKIPEDIA CONTAINS CONTENT THAT MAY BE OBJECTIONABLE
In its encyclopedic function, Wikipedia contains millions of articles on a vast
array of topics. A relatively small fraction of these topics are frequently
censored by educational, governmental, corporate, parental and other filtering
schemes.

    - Some Wikipedia articles discuss words or language that are considered
      profane, vulgar or offensive by some readers. 
      
    - Articles may contain audio, visual, or written representations of people
      or events which may be protected by some cultures.
      
    - Wikipedia contains many different images, some of which are considered
      objectionable or offensive by some readers. For example, some articles
      contain graphical depictions of violence, or depictions of human anatomy.
      
    - Many articles contain frank discussion of controversial topics. Some
      subjects that are discussed have criminal applications in some
      jurisdictions. Others contain information on dangerous or otherwise risky
      activities.
      
    - Wikipedia contains spoilers.
    
    - Wikipedia may contain triggers for people with post-traumatic stress
      disorder.
      
    - Wikipedia may contain images and videos which can trigger epileptic
      seizures and other medical conditions. Since Wikipedia is open to
      contributions from the public, there may at any time be graffiti present
      on Wikipedia.
      
    - There may be medical, legal or other information that is normally also the
      subject of professional opinions; Wikipedia is not a substitute for
      seeking the help of a professional. Please note: Wikipedia does not give
      legal advice or medical advice.

Wikipedia's current policy is to include such content, provided it breaches
neither any of our existing policies (especially Neutral point of view) nor the
laws of the state of Florida in the United States, where Wikipedia is hosted.
See a list of controversial issues for some examples of articles that may
contain such content. Some of these articles contain warnings, but many do not.

In any case, Wikipedia is a work in progress, and many articles contain errors,
bias, duplication, or simply need tender loving care. We encourage readers to
help us fix these problems. The great majority of articles are written primarily
or solely by individuals who are not subject matter experts, and may lack
academic or professional credentials in the area.

Wikipedia contains obscure information that would not be covered in a
conventional encyclopedia. Wikipedia's coverage is based on the interests of its
volunteer contributors. Readers should not judge the importance of topics based
on their coverage in Wikipedia, nor assume that a topic is important merely
because it is the subject of a Wikipedia article. 


(Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. WikipediaÂ® is a
registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit
organization.)
